Because then, you know, you should mention
Francisco Villa. Yes. That man had a lot of people.
That man was very cunning. Do you know what is
cunning? Yes. He had a lot of luck. A lot. He never
fished. And he, with a gun, where he put a shot, he
put the six shots of the gun. He was very good at
shooting. He didn't sleep with the soldiers
there. He was the only one who knew where he was. And
he took out his ideas and he sent the others who were
with him, the generals and everything. Well, he
had many federal soldiers in Torreón. Yes. They
were raised there. Well, it's a very big town, that
place. Yes. And you and your family were there in
Torreón during these days or not? And the Federals
were in Piedras Negras, they wanted to throw us out
of there. And your family was in Piedras Negras?
Yes. And when they found out that Francisco Villa
took Torreón, from where we were there was a
mountain like 100
miles away, I think. They ran to the mountain and
saw that we were in Piedras Negras. They asked if
they could take us out of here, and they took us out.
And they left it there, and then all the people went
back to the same place in Tabonas. But there,
everything... I lived there for seven years. And
that's what we worked on there. In agriculture.
And they planted a lot of corn, everything. They
bought all the corn, they sold it in Piedras
Negras. And they named it there... One ton, which
is called in Mexico, is 2,000 pounds. Well, I sold
it for 250. 250. I sold it for a ton. And I left a lot of
corn for the household expenses, to feed the pigs,
to keep them from killing the pigs, and chickens,
and cows. You were living there. You had other
things that you couldn't have there. You'd go to
the black market, you'd take corn and sell it there
and buy whatever you wanted. And you'd go back and
forth. And that's how you were living there. But
when the revolution came and left everything, it
was very hard. It was very hard. And there was,
well, here it's more than the truth. Sometimes
they didn't have anything to grab or eat. And your
family too? Yes, because if there was nothing to
grab, there was no work to do. We would go to La Pasta
to cut firewood and take firewood to sell to
Piedras Negras to get what we needed. And then I
thought I would come here. Me and other boys came
here. And there we were planting onions in Big
Wells. And there I came to Beauty. There was my
wife's father. There he was. And there we were. And
there I was sowing in those years there. And then
from there I came here to Grand. And here I was. All
of these are... Two of them are from Mexico. He's
the eldest in the family, one of the women and one of
the men. That little man was a year and a half old. Do
you know what a year and a half is? A year and a half, a
year and a half. That's a year and six months. Yes,
yes. Well, and he, now that he's grown up, tells us
here, to us, that sometimes he asks some American
men, well, where are you from? Well, I'm from
Mexico. Well, how are you? He says, I went through
the chest. Are you wet? No, I'm not wet. Wet means he
went through the water. Yes. And he tells them that
he went through the chest. And they think he went
swimming. He went through the river. No. But he
makes them say that he went through Chiquilla.
Yes. Because my wife was in the gas because she was a
year and a half, but she was small. Yes. That one who
is here. Yes. He was in the Second World War. He was
in Alaska. And where does he live now? Where does he
live now? Where does he live? He lives in that
apartment over there. Ah, here in Bryan. His name
is Herman. And there's another son of him who's a
junior. He was in Alaska, and another one was in
Houston. His name was Hermenegildo, but in the
army they called him Herman. What kind of work does
Herman have? Right now? Yes. He puts these fences
in the yards. And his other one? I think about 20
years, I think. He was working in the dining room of
the East, Duncan Hall. Yes. And he was the
assistant of, who knows, I would say, Treviño.
Yes. Leonardo Treviño. That was the one who put him
there. Yes. And this German was his assistant. And
as he says, it's a lot of responsibility. And since
he was in charge of the working women, and many boys
don't want to work, they're very hard-headed, and
they fight a lot. There are times when they fight
with each other, and he had to make sure that they
didn't do that. That they did the work well and
everything, because at that time, not now, as they
say, as the dining room is now. There is no cleaning
like before. Right now, only women work there.
Only women. Right now, in this time, people of
color don't
want to work. I was working here last
year. Last year was the beginning of the year. In a
yard of trails that are here and there. Have you
seen it? I think so. The road that goes here to Casey
Hall. Yes. I was working with this man here at the
store. He gave me a job there. And one day he told me,
you know, I'm going to bring a boy of color who has
worked with me a hundred times. I said to him, the
people of Colorado want to work. He
said, no, he's a very hard worker. But he took him.
After noon. He took him. When the man was there, he
was working. It was only he who came and went to
sleep in a room where he was working. When he came
back he made him sleep. He told me that the boy was
working and I told him that he was sleeping there.
He is very hardworking. He doesn't want to work.
Here is a relative of my wife who works and left the
job because of the age. He worked in the bakery, in
the dining room, there in the drawer. And he said,
they put a lady of color there to help me with what
was there, and two others to help my brother. And
then he said to one, look at this. I said, I don't see
anything. Well, then why don't you come here to
work? He said, I don't see anything. And he didn't
work. And he said, what did he say to the mayor
there? until the mayor told him that if he didn't
want to work, he had better quit. Because this
relative of my wife told him, well, you pay a person
for not being able to sit down. You are paying him.
He said, well, he has to work. Well, he doesn't want
to work. It's a very hard job for me because he
doesn't help me with anything. And they don't want
to work. Both men and women. Well, why? And they
can't get rid of them? What is it that they can't
get rid of or make them work? I don't know. Well,
there it is. That's something that you should see.
And wherever you go, they talk about it. That they
don't want to work with them. I don't know why. Like
there, as I told the man when I was working there, I
told him, hey, it's these men who walk around in
trunks. Are they working with you? Or who were they
working with? They were sitting all day. All day.
They weren't working at all. No? No. And they were
stopping him. I told this man, I told him, if you
want to find a job, you don't have to work and you
have to pay me. He said, because you have to work,
well, and because you don't work. And that's what I
heard today, that they can't exploit them. I don't
know how the law is. Well, what do you think? Who
works the most? The people who live in Mexico or the
people who live here? Yes, but as I say, like there
in the dining room when I was working there, many
girls who didn't want to work, then the... The man
in charge said, well, if you don't want to do the
work, go and let someone else come and do the work.
Because the work is needed. And if you don't want to
do it, it's very hard for the people here to get the
work from others. They get the work and they don't
pay for it. Better go and let someone else come and
do the work. And that's how they did it. Because
that man didn't even want to play with the boys.
Because there were many who threw themselves with
glasses, because there they had to wash glasses
and small and large dishes and cups and everything
they had to wash there. Yes. I, the time I lived
there, I was working in the washing machine. I was
working there. And that's where I saw many of them,
that they were better occupied than because they
weren't going to play. But it's very hard to fight
with people like that. And that's what my girls
don't want anymore. Well, is life different here
in Mexico? Well, it's
different, you know why? As I was reading a
newspaper now that says that Here in this place
there was a quake. Do you know what a quake is? A
quake. They call it earthquake, I think that's how
they call it in English. Earthquake. In
Nicaragua. Yes, yes, earthquake. Well, there I
was reading that a Mexican priest says, and
another priest, do you know what priest? Yes. He's
from the Pichas. Yes. from Nicaragua, he wrote him
a letter, telling him that he was asleep when he
heard a noise in Nicaragua. He said, then I woke up
and I looked out the window, through the window, he
said, and then I looked at the bed, I saw that the bed
moved like this, over there, over here, the bed. He
said, then I went outside and I looked out the
street, there was a lot of people in the street.
from all those who had left so that they wouldn't be
killed. Life here is very hard right now. And there
are several problems in that place, because
people are very poor. Very, very poor. They work
and they don't get paid enough so that they can live
and dress and have something. They don't get paid
anything. And that's a very hard thing for people.
And slavery, do you know what slavery is? Yes.
Slavery is slavery? Slavery is when, like here,
you have to obey what the government says. Yes. And
you don't get a job. or they don't pay him and he has
to live in misery. He's a slave. That's what he
tells them to do. He says, those are several
problems. We have to help the people. We have to pay
them and treat them well. That happened in Mexico
last year. But not now. This revolution was what
fought for slavery. But not all governments have
done well for the nation. I'm going to mention
López Mateo, who did a lot for Mexico. And he said he
was going to do everything he could so that Mexico
would rise up and play just like everyone else. I
don't know how he's going to run, because I don't
receive papers from there. And that's what he
needs. As they say, there are still people in
Mexico who don't have a place to live. Like this
bishop Flores, who is Mexican. It was Patricio
Flores, the obispo. It was in September, the 16th
of September, when they inaugurated the
independence in Mexico. So he wrote, he sent a
paper saying that still in Mexico, not everyone
could scream that it was time for freedom. He said,
because there are many people who don't have a
place to live. so that everyone has the freedom to
live. Well, as I say, the people who live in the town
are working in the town, but the people who live
outside the town, on the ranch, life is different
here. That's what I think. But that's why... I've
read books, because the government of Mexico gave
land to all the people to make them live. But as many
people say in Mexico, many people say that they
don't want to work. And many work the land and many
don't work it. But I say for me that the government
is to blame for all this. The government should
have people who work in those lands. But here it's
the same, and in Mexico too, I think. If the
government sends, like the president, something
is happening here. He sends a man to come here. And
here the businessmen realize everything. Well,
or they find him, look at him. And then they say,
here, take this amount of money, and you say you're
going to fix it. That's the way you can fix
anything. That's how you fix it. And that's what
happens there, and that's what happens here. I've
read a lot of books, and a lot of newspapers, and
that's where I realize all that. But, well, I don't
know what they'll be like. Because many times, A
lot of people say that you don't know anything.
That you're ignorant and all that. But if you don't
know how to read, you don't know anything. But if
you know how to read, you do know a lot. Because if
you read the newspapers, you realize how
everything is happening. And that's what's going
on right now. Like here, with me, I have a insurance
that I'm paying. One of the collectors who came
to... He came
in the car and he stopped outside and he talked to
me. I said, well, what's going on here? He said, you
don't know that I'm coming to see you, that you pay
more in insurance. I said, yes, I pay, but look, I
don't support you. He said, no, just write that you
are paying more. I said, you go, otherwise I lose
it. Why should I be afraid that I'm paying more in
insurance? You go and I go. I said, don't bully me
like that. And don't bully people either. That's
what I told them. That a lot of people don't look or
know anything. Because something happened to me
since 1925, here in Bryan. One of my boys, who is in
Houston, the youngest of the men, he was about six
months old when he was born. And one of the security
collectors from America passed by. And when the
boy was out there on the street, He stopped with me,
I was getting there, I was at work, he stopped with
me and said to me, hey, don't you want to put your
girls in security? Look, here they are, a car can
come, a horse can come, a cow can hit them and you
need to put them
in security. Well, I already had, it seems to me
that two, two or three had security. And I put this
one smaller. And he told me, he said, look, When he
turns 20, they will pay you as if you were dead. But
he lied to me. When he turned 20, I didn't know
anything. I went to the police station to talk to
the manager and I told him. He said, no, that man
cheated on you. He didn't tell you the truth. When
he was 20 years old, because he was paying five
cents a week at that time, and when he was 20 years
old, they were going to pay him like he was dead. And
I went to the neighbor and said, no, this man is
lying. Come here, I'll bring you another gift.
That's what you're going to do. When he turns 20
years old, he can get a bigger insurance. That's
what I should have told you. I should have told you
that I was going to pay you when I was dead. And
that's where I got all that. And when Mr. Ellis, who
ran the insurance at Southern Life, found me in
1945, then I didn't have insurance, nor this, nor
my wife. The boys did have it in the other. And he
told me, hey, do you want to put, do you want to take
this insurance? I told him, I told him, well, it's
not bad, I know well that it's good, Alex. But... If
you're going to tell me the truth, and you're not
going to deceive me, because you don't lose
anything, I'm the one who's going to lose the money
I'm paying. If right now you say something and then
it turns out that it's not like you told me, and
you're going to make a fool of yourself. Two times
we met and that's how we were. Another one came and
said, look, here are my... I said, well, he can say
the same thing, but what had happened to me, I
didn't want to be trusted anymore. Well, finally,
the third time he came to find me, I thought, I
thought, I said, well, I have insurance. Neither
me, nor my wife, nor this one. And if something
happens to me, it's worth more to take it. And I took
it. And since then I'm paying that insurance. But I
always talked to him. And I wanted to tell him about
that man who came with me here, but I didn't tell him
anything. And another American, not from the same
place, came to collect the money here. I wasn't
here at home, my wife was. And she paid him, but she
didn't sign the card. When my wife came, she told
me. I paid him, he came to collect the insurance,
and he took the money, but he didn't sign the card.
And I put on the card what day he had come, how much he
had taken. When another came the next month, I
already told him, I said, why do you do that with the
people? You shouldn't do that. You are the
culprits of the evil you do. We don't, we comply
with payments, but you don't carry your books
correctly. He said, well, I don't know why that man
did that to you. I don't know either. So he left and
didn't come back. Because I don't know where all
that will be. Because right now, all the
businesses that I did when I was working, right now
I don't owe anything to the house. I'm paying the
taxes, the security of the house and I pay the bills
and everything. And since I used to take out a
hundred times credit in the loans that are here in
the town, the way it is that I fall into cards that if
I need money, that I go, that I just go and sign. No.
When I can, when I see that I can pay that money, I go
and take it out. But since right now I'm not
working, I'm going to take out the money, how am I
going to pay it? It's going to be bad. It's going to
be bad to take it out. But as long as they're helping
me, I'm doing fine. That's why. But I don't owe the
house anything. I wanted to put a chiropractor on
it. My wife had a lot of portraits here. My daughter
took them off because she was going to put a thin
chiropractor instead of paper and paint. Just
like I put it there. I want to put it here. Nezke just
left these there to remove them
and put the syrup. It's not very expensive, it's
expensive right now, but... Last year it was... It
was 75 cents, 80, the leaf. And when I bought that
one, I paid 1.18 pesos. Who knows, now it's worth
1.25. That's what I think. Because it's going to be
like... It's been two years since I bought this
diary. That's always why I saw the paper that was
very... Let's see, give me the
plate. Here's the plate. And
that's what we're trying to do. To live well with
the people, the neighbors, because otherwise we
can't. But as I was reading in this new paper that I
have, the one that fell yesterday, that this
bishop Flores says, that he doesn't know why among
us people say, we live,
that if he has and is living in another way, One
says, how come I don't have that one? But that
shouldn't be like that. One should think in
another way. Because everything is here. He gives
us and He takes away from us. Because I am also
reading the Holy Scripture. Do you know what it is?
Yes. Well, I am reading it. Every night I read a
little. As there is in the Holy Scripture, there is
a... whose name is Job. You haven't
read the Bible. And there it says that this man
was... well, he was a very good man, and all the time
he treated people well, and he feared God in
everything. He wasn't... How can I put it? that he
spoke ill and that he spoke against God. He never
said it. And it says in the Scripture, saying,
being God with his children outside, Satan comes
and says to God, where does Satan come from? He
says, I come to turn the earth around, to see
everything, to see all the kingdoms it has and
everything. Then God says to him, don't you
remember my servant Job? Who is a fearful man to
God, who has never sinned, nor does he curse
anyone. He said no. He said, well, try it. Just
don't kill him. Well, God sent him, because he was
Satan. Well,
after a few days, he had a lot of A lot of animals of
all kinds. A lot of them. And there were a lot of
people who were taking care of the animals. Where?
Where? These animals? Like cows, horses,
donkeys, camels. Where? Where are these animals?
No, they don't say where, they just say that they
are here. Ah, yes. Well, then... He was sitting
there when a man came in a hurry. He came and said,
I'm here to tell you that another tribe is coming.
They killed all those who were taking care of the
camels and took them all away. That man didn't
leave when another man came. And he said, I'm
coming to tell you, I escaped and killed everyone
else, I escaped to come and tell you that they took
all the horses. And Taino went to the other one. And
everyone came and told him about all the animals
that he had to steal. And he came, he had three
children and two daughters. When he came, Taino
went to the last one, when the other one came and
told him, well, you know, I'm coming to tell you
that that your children were having a banquet. Do
you know what a banquet is? Banquet. Banquet? Yes.
Well, he said, and they were eating and drinking.
When a strong wind came from this side and threw the
house on top of them.
Then the wife of that man told them, she said, you
see, They took everything. And why don't you curse
your God? He says to him, woman, you speak like a
foolish woman. Do you know what he means? He says,
you speak like a foolish woman. God gave me
everything I had. When I was born, I didn't have
clothes. God gave it to me. God took it from me. It
was all His. He knows what he's
doing. That's how it happened. After that, there
was a time when Job didn't say anything, nor did he
curse God, or anything. And then, after that,
Satan came and took him back. And from the head to
the feet, he put a leper on him. Do you know what a
leper is? Yes. Well, he put it all over his body. You
see, he was suffering. And the woman said to him,
why are you hurting him?
What he did was that he put ashes on his head. And
everyone was waiting for the will of God. God no
longer did anything, nor did he say anything. Then
he healed him and gave him more wealth than he had.
And he had seven children. Five men and three
women. And he said, there were no women in any tribe
as beautiful as they were. But he didn't sin.
That's what I say. Why do we admire other people and
think bad of other people? We have envy. Do you know
what envy is? Yes, envy. Envy. Envy to envy others.
And they say that we should see what happened with
Christ and John the Baptist. that neither one nor
the other spoke a word. They had nothing to do with
each other. And that's how we should be. Yes,
that's right. Tell me, please, a little more about
your life in Piedras Negras. During the years 1912
to 1915,
Tell me a little more about your life during these
years. Well, since the 12th we came here to Piedras
Negras. It was called San Carlos, that place. San
Carlos. San Carlos was the name of that place. And
that place was where the general office was. And
there was another place called Victoria. We were
close to that place, Victoria. They were, as they
say in agriculture, sowing everything. They were
sowing, they named it, who knows if you understand
that, the room. like the one who has his mule shots,
all his skulls, harvests, and everything, and he
does all his work, and with the owner of the ranch,
he gives him a part, and the man who sows takes three
parts, this is the fourth. That's where they were
sowing there. And we picked up the harvest, all the
cotton, what we sowed, we sold it like that, We used
to sell the paca in San Carlos.
And that's how we spent our lives there. When we
needed clothes, shoes, supplies, we went to
Piedras Negras. We sold what we had and went to
Aguilepas to buy what we needed. Shoes, clothes,
pants, hats. And so we were going, we were sowing,
we were working on the land. What was hard there,
because there were times like these northern
rivers that passed in the past, I remembered that
you have to water the land to plant in February. You
water the land to plant in March. And there were
times when the north was like this, the northern
rivers that came, and you had to walk between the
water. They gave us water up to here.
And it was better to walk in the water than to walk
outside because when we went out, it seemed that
the cold air was cutting us. And those seven years
were to be watered in February and we had to water in
May or June so that the corn was sown, the cotton was
sown, and so on. As I told you, my wife, my children,
all the suffering that I went through, now it's all
coming back to me. In what year were you married to
your wife? I got married in 1915. Three years after
you went there. Three years after... Yes, because
I didn't think of getting married. That's the
truth, as always. When the revolution was still in
Mexico, it was just around the corner. Nothing
stopped. I wanted to get involved in the
revolution.
And a sister of my father told me, I'll take that off
your head, you're leaving, we don't know where
you're going to stay. You're not going to know more
about us. And every now and then she would tell me to
look for a girl and marry her. And stop going there.
So many have died there that they don't even know
where they're going to stay. And that's why I got
married. No, because I didn't want to get married.
I still wanted to get into the revolution. A lot of
women got involved. One of the women who got
involved became a colonel. She was in Mexico City.
That's why I didn't get involved. I thought it
would go well. I got married in 1915.
It was September 15th.
Suegro,
your mother
and you?
His wife died. He was alone. I was with him. I wanted
to help him. I wanted to help him. I wanted my wife to
do the work. But he left. He came here.
And two years after he came, he wrote to us, asking
us to come. Well, seeing how life was there in Duro,
I thought about coming. I was struggling because
when you don't understand the language, it's very
hard for you. For everyone. It's hard for the
people who don't understand anything. Because
they can't see things, they can't ask questions,
they don't know the language. They can't ask
questions because they don't know the language.
And it's hard for some people. When you come here,
you can't understand a language. And that's what I
say, that you can't. Because... Sometimes they
even make a mistake by saying one thing and then
another.
And that's not good. And that's why we came here. As
I told you, we had to stay in that place. Sowing,
yes. But after the revolution, not when the
revolution didn't... Well, it was all over. It was
all over because the man who lived in that place
told everyone that he was being persecuted by the
government. He said, I'm not going to be able to
help them like I used to. I have to move them to the
other side, which was here, to Texas. He said, when
I can, I'll send them everything they need here.
But if I can't, I can't. Because if I send them, the
government takes them away. It's not good for you
or anything. It's not good for the government. The
problem is that you're going to plant The land,
as they are sowing. Oh, they will give me whatever
you want. You will have to work. I wake up and see
that there is no help anymore. They are making us
live as they could. If there was help, they would
give it to you, but if not, they wouldn't. It's like
I say, but... And when that revolution...
that people said... The government soldiers were
doing a lot of things with the families. They were
killing a lot of people and stealing a lot of
people. Almost all of the people who came from
here, they left everything here. They left all the
food. They lost because they did nothing. We
stayed there, they didn't do anything. And all
that was left, the poor people who were there, who
were there before those people came out of here,
that was the one who took everything. And those who
left that, they lost it. They came to this side. A
lot of people come to this side during these days.
Your relatives too? Your relatives too come here?
They came here? They came here to Texas, all the
people. All the people, your mom and dad too? No, my
mom died in this place, in San Carlos. She died in
1914. And my dad, no, he lived, he died until now,
two years ago. He bought here, Have you heard of
that beautiful valley? On the side of Matamoros?
Yes, I know that beautiful valley. Well, near that
beautiful valley he bought a land. A land? 100
acres of land. Yes. He bought there. And there he
died. And two brothers because he got married
after my mother died. Yes. And that family was in
the other woman. There they are. This is a portrait
of my father and my brother over
there. Why does your family come to Piedras
Negras? For what reason? Well, you can't see that
we went from here to there to sow. It was my father
and me and this man. We got together, we got married
and that's it. And they were also sowing. They were
living, as they say, in the hospital San Jose. Yes.
They were retired from us. But now, we've been
certified by her. Oh, yes. And mine is up there. Oh,
it's for...
How do you say it? For the wool. For the wool. Yes,
for the wool. And yours is up there too. Yes, I have
it up there because there are times when I have to
ask for it from the Social Security, or from the
Guadalajara. Yes, yes. And that's why I have it in a
bag. It's a very good thing. Here I had it, but now
I'm taking it off and putting it back on. In 1961.
Yes, the same year as you. It was in 1954 when I
escaped. The first of April. The first of April,
okay. In 1954. Because my two girls were in the
service. Yes. And here, some friends, who knows if
they know them, I don't know, They work in the
school. One of them is called Pete Rodriguez. And
the other one is called Pablo Rodriguez, who is the
one you see in the Esviza Hall dining room. They are
the ones who helped us fill the blanks and
everything. And they used to tell me before, they
used to tell me, you must become an American
citizen, because if you think of residing here, so
that the law can hear it and support it. Because
many times, in some works of the state or
elsewhere, people who are not citizens cannot
work. And so you cannot work.